In this code challenge, you will get to apply and extend what you learned in the previous video.
I think this will be a fantastic opportunity to solidify your ability to isolate and work with attention
heads.
Exercise one is not so difficult, but it does require some attention to detail and not just blindly
copy pasting.
So here you should import the Pythia 2.3 billion parameter model.
We have worked with this model previously in the course.
It's from the eleuther org.
And as a reminder it looks like this.
So you can put this model on the GPU.
Next you will need to hook all of the qkv matrices across all of the layers.
Now you can start by copying the code from the previous video, but be mindful that the names of the
layers and the matrices are different in this model compared to the open AI format.
Now I want you to push the model to the GPU, but because we are doing the analyses on the CPU inside
the hook function, when you're grabbing the activations, you can also just put them the activations
directly back into the CPU.
Next, copy the text about Fiji that we looked at in the previous video.
Tokenize and push the tokens through the model.
Of course, it's always a good idea to check the keys of the activations dictionary and the size of
one of them, just to make sure that your code is correct.
So here we have one sequence.
In this case, with this model we end up with 39 tokens.
And I will let you figure out what this number here 7680 corresponds to.
And make sure you figure that number out.
Make sure you know where this number comes from, what it means, and how it relates to other numbers
that you see in this model description.
Finally, write and check your code for splitting up the Q vectors into heads and also the size of each
head.
Again, you can copy the code from the previous video, but be mindful of changes to variable names
and so on that might be necessary when working with the Pythia 2.3 billion parameter model.
By the way, this stuff here is just about making sure that your code is accurate.
You don't have to do any analyses or worry about different layers or anything like that.
For this exercise.
So that's for exercise one.
Now you should pause the video and switch to code.
And now I will discuss my solution.
Import libraries, yada yada yada.
Okay, so here's exercise one.
I'm importing this 2.8 billion parameter model.
Of course 2.8 billion parameters.
Sounds really impressive.
And still until you start learning about modern llms and then 2.8 billion is like really?
That's so small.
You can do anything with such a tiny model.
Uh, anyway, so yeah, here I'm also extracting some useful variables.
This is initially copied from the code file for the previous video, but you need to be very mindful
of updating these names, uh, when you need to.
So, for example, uh, Eleuther calls their models the number of heads.
They call that parameter num.
Attention heads.
Super clear.
Couldn't get more clear than that.
OpenAI calls it n underscore heads.
Uh, yeah.
And then same with this and so on.
So yeah, you just have to be mindful of that.
But the good thing is, when you have a good understanding of the architecture and the organization
of these models, then it's pretty straightforward to look through the description of the models and
pick out exactly which matrices, which layer names you actually are looking for.
Okay, so here is the hook.
Uh, this is mostly copied from the previous lecture.
This you need to change.
So we have GPT neo X and then the layers.
So in GPT this would actually look like uh let's see that would look like that for example uh attention
query key value.
So you're really changing a lot of stuff here.
Although of course the basic mechanism of implanting this hook and defining the hook function is the
same.
So I can run that, uh, this is all literally copy pasted from the previous video.
Although of course I added this to push the text to the GPU.
And then here we are checking for the sizes.
Yeah, nothing too spectacular there.
By the way, you know, this, uh, this entire cell here took less than less than one second closer
to zero seconds.
If you are running this on the CPU, I guess this would take many seconds.
Maybe 10s 15 20s.
Okay.
But this is really the only time we need to run text through the model here.
Okay?
And then finally, uh, this is, uh, basically entirely copied from the previous video.
Of course, the results themselves are different.
So here there are 32 heads compared to 12 heads for, uh, GPT two small.
And the size of each head is 39.
This is the token and 80 is the dimensionality of each head.
And where does that come from?
Well, we have 32 heads and 80 dimensions.
When you multiply those, you should get whatever is 700, 7680 divided by three.
And that needs to be divided by three, of course, because that is the qkv matrices all concatenated
together.
Now for exercise two.
This is the main exercise of this video.
A lot of this exercise you can solve by copying and modifying code from the previous video.
Essentially what you want to do here is calculate the softmax attention weights for two groups of tokens
from the final token to all the previous tokens in the sequence, and for all of the self-attention
tokens.
So we did that in the previous video, but there it was only for one layer.
So just one transformer block.
Now here in this video You want to do it for all of the layers.
And then we will visualize how these softmax probability distributions change over the different layers.
The main analysis code will be a for loop that looks something like this.
So you start with a loop over all of the layers, and then you separate out the Q and k matrices and
split those into heads.
Now all of this code you already have from the end of exercise one, by the way, in the previous video
and also in my solutions for this video, I organized all of these heads as separate elements in a tuple.
It is also possible to reshape these matrices into tensors, where the heads corresponds to one of the
dimensions, instead of each head being a separate element in a tuple.
But anyway, I will continue working with each head here as a separate element in this tuple.
Okay.
So then we can loop over all of the heads, calculate the raw attention scores and add the causal mask.
And just as a little reminder the raw attention scores are the qk transpose scaled by the head dimensionality.
Then you can apply softmax exactly how it's implemented in the attention algorithm.
Now you have all the data you need, and the rest of this loop is just picking out the right tokens.
So here you get the final token with all the previous tokens.
And here is the self-attention token for all of the other tokens in this sequence.
And in all of these cases, I have excluded the first token from the analyses, just because we know
from the previous video that the first token in the sequence will trivially equal one its softmax probability
value.
And so yeah, I'm just ignoring that for convenience.
Once you have finished this loop over all of the heads within each layer, you can then calculate the
KDE analysis that I showed you in the previous video to estimate PDFs of the attention weights distributions.
Now, the goal of this part of the code is to have two vectors to.
So two lines for each layer, one that corresponds to the distributions of the final to the previous
tokens.
And then we have the distribution for the self-attention tokens.
Now after that loop is finished, after you've run this whole analysis, you can recreate this scatter
plot from the previous video.
This is again only for one layer.
It shows all the softmax attention weights from the final to the previous tokens and for all of the
self-attention tokens.
Now in the previous video, I also had self-attention for the first token as a separate distribution
over here on the right, but I left that out in this video.
Okay, so this is just for one layer.
And then you can make line plots that show the KDE distributions in all of the 32 layers.
Now this plot here has 64 lines corresponding to 32 layers.
So 32 transformers and one line for self-attention that that distribution and one line for the KDE estimated
PDF of the final token to all of the previous tokens.
Now, in this figure, this doesn't really nicely show the changes in the distribution over the different
layers.
It just shows the overall differences between self-attention and the final to previous plots for all
of the layers.
So therefore the final plot for this exercise will look like this.
So here we have two heat maps hidden behind the red curtains.
One heat map is for the attention weights for the final token to the previous ones.
And then we have for the self-attention weights.
So now the idea is that each column in this matrix.
So each vertical slice in this image is the visualization of the KDE estimated PDF for each layer.
So that's like the smoothed version of the scatter plots that you have been making in the previous video,
and that you also made here in this code down here.
And that means that the color in these heat maps corresponds to the amount of clustering.
So you can think of it like the number of dots for each softmax probability grid value between 0 and
1.
So here you see there's lots of softmax activation weights that have values close to zero.
And then at least in the final layers here there's also some token pairs that have very high softmax
probabilities.
So it gets white all the way up here for higher density.
So overall it's quite sparse and bimodally distributed, meaning that most of the token pairs with the
final token are either very small probabilities or very large probabilities.
So then the question is what this looks like for the other layers for final to previous and what it
looks like for the self-attention weights.
Okay, I hope that all makes sense, and I hope that you enjoy working through this exercise, which
is what you should do now.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution and the results.
Here are the initializations.
So this variable SM you have seen this before.
That is our high resolution grid for the KDE estimate from 0 to 1 in 300 steps.
Okay.
So that is for the PDF estimate.
I will store all of those data in this matrix.
Here you can see it is the number of layers.
So 32 by 300 by two.
And the two corresponds to the two different analyses.
So the final token to the previous tokens and all of the self-attention.
Here I am looping over all of the layers.
So 32 different layers.
Here I'm extracting the qkv matrices that I'm splitting from this matrix.
As I mentioned in the previous video, I'm hard coding this to be the first batch or the first sequence
of this batch, And therefore I'm splitting along dimension one because although this is a three dimensional
tensor, this here is a two dimensional matrix.
I just wanted to remind you of that because yeah, this dimension stuff can get really confusing.
You always need to make sure you are checking out the sizes of different matrices as you are developing
code.
Okay.
Yeah.
So as I mentioned, this will create a tuple with each head in a different element in the tuple.
If you want, you can also organize these into a matrix such that the attention heads are actually just
one of the dimensions of these tensors.
If you want to do it that way, it's fine.
But yeah, then you can actually avoid this for loop if you do it that way.
But I think it's a little bit simpler anyway.
Uh, okay.
So that's that.
All right.
So now I'm looping over all of the heads and this is, you know, looping over all the heads for within
each individual layer.
So here we have q times k transpose divided by the square root of the dimensionality of each head.
Adding the mask the causal mask and then running it through softmax.
Okay.
So all this code you've seen before.
Here I'm getting the softmax values for the final token to all of the previous tokens, but excluding
the final token.
So I'm excluding the self-attention on the last token because it's included in this data set.
And here I guess I'm including the first token.
I don't know.
You can keep it or leave it out.
I don't think that's going to matter that much.
Okay, then here I'm getting the diagonal of this square matrix here and excluding the first token in
the sequence.
And this gives me all of the self-attention.
So this is q k transpose for the same token.
Okay.
So then yeah also just concatenating this.
So now this loop is finished here.
So now I've run through all of the heads in this particular layer.
And now I can get from these values.
So pooling all the data over all the heads I'm going to estimate the KDE and evaluate it at this high
resolution grid points and then scale it down again.
That's to account for differences in sample sizes between these data and these data.
What we really care about here is the shape of the distributions.
And not so much the exact values themselves.
In fact, the the exact y axis values of those distributions will depend on this resolution here.
So that's arbitrary.
We really just want to be able to compare the shapes of the distributions.
Okay.
So then I insert them for this layer for all of the softmax probability interpolated grid points, and
then this is for final to previous and self-attention.
So run that analysis pretty fast.
Just takes one second.
And now we can visualize this.
Now this is the same kind of plot that I showed in the previous video.
Again in the previous video, I also had another one here for the self-attention in the very first token
in the sequence for each of the heads.
Now, this scatter plot here is only for the final layer.
Why is this only for the final layer?
Because this variable here gets overwritten for every individual layer.
So if you wanted to plot these data for each layer, then you'd have to come up with a new way of organizing
these.
Maybe you could put these into a list or a big matrix, so that you could store them all for all of
the layers, but in this case, I don't really care.
I'm not storing all of these data from each layer, so therefore it gets overwritten at each iteration.
And therefore when I plot it here, it's only running the data that I have stored which corresponds
to the final layer.
So the last transformer block.
I don't want to make too big a deal of this.
You do see, again, as I discussed in the previous video, that there's a lot of token pairs that get
suppressed here, and this is fairly sparse up here.
And that is really indicating that this attention mechanism has learned that most of the token pairs
in a given token sequence should not be too strongly highlighted.
We really just want to pick out the few, you know, the small number of token pairs that really should
be bound together because they are important to, you know, one is important for modulating the context
of the other.
And that's what this shows here.
Okay.
Here I think I was just confirming the sizes.
So 32 layers, 32 transformer blocks, 300 grid spacing and two of these analyses here.
Okay.
So now here I'm plotting, uh, making the line plots.
So plotting one for each layer.
And I'm missing an end parenthesis here in the title.
Uh.
Very good.
Okay.
Little typo there.
I wonder how many of these tiny, meaningless typos I have throughout the course.
I hope it's not too many.
Okay, so in these plots, each color of the line corresponds to a different layer.
So you do see that there are some transitions over the different layers, at least for final to previous.
It's not so clear here for self-attention.
This is not really the best way to visualize the data.
If you want to look at how things change over the different layers.
But I wanted to include this plot here so we can see the really strong differences between these two
categories.
So final to previous and self-attention.
And in general what you see is more sparsity for the final token to the previous ones in this sentence.
I don't want to make too big a deal out of these differences here, because this is just based on one
sentence about the country of Fiji.
It is a beautiful place, but we shouldn't overinterpret that one sentence to make grand sweeping claims
about how models work.
And now for the final visualization of this exercise and this code challenge as well.
Those are the heat maps across all the layers and all the softmax probabilities.
So essentially what we are going to do is take all of these individual lines and put them into a matrix,
or actually, yeah, they're already in a matrix.
But instead of representing all these data as individual lines, we will stack them all up and represent
them as an image that we can color.
And that's what I do here.
So here I'm using I am show head distributions all the same data.
So we have all of the layers all of the softmax probabilities.
And then we have zero for the final to previous and then one here in the third dimension for the self-attention
weights.
Okay.
So how do you read these images.
So the color here corresponds to the strength of the probability density.
And that is the height on the previous axis.
So the color here corresponds to the height on this y axis on this plot here.
And then we have each of these columns in here in this matrix corresponds to each of the individual
lines here.
So you can just see all of these layers are very high at the beginning, and then they quickly plummet
to zero or very small values.
And that is reflected in the color here where it's white colors for large numbers, down here for zero
probability.
And then it gets up to darker values corresponding to small probabilities as we increase in the softmax
attention probability.
So remember this y axis here is not the probability density that the KDE is estimating.
This y axis corresponds to the numerical values of the softmax attention calculation.
I hope that all makes sense.
It's a little bit confusing to see, but what's nice about these plots, these visual representations,
is you can really see the change over the different layers, in particular with this shift from basically
earlier layers where the attention mechanism is suppressing all of the tokens with regards to the context
information that's being loaded onto the final token.
And then as we get later into the model, we get into deeper layers.
Now again, the model is transitioning from processing the current token to making a prediction about
what the next token should be.
And there you see that a very small number of token pairs for the with the final token in the sequence
have a very large softmax probability.
So the model is saying, I know this word and this word.
You know, there's a very small number of words, just like you see up here that are really relevant
for understanding the final token and making a prediction about what the next token should be.
And all of the other token pairs between the final token and the previous tokens.
Those are all irrelevant.
They're not context dependent.
So the model is not going to use them to generate a prediction for the next token.
And who knows, maybe these are words like a and the and other things that just aren't really contributing
to the prediction for what should come next.
One final comment I want to make about the visualization is that you can also spin this around.
You can rotate this image and plot it the other way.
So if you would get rid of this, uh, and then let's see, we need to change or swap the x and y axes.
Then you see that now this plot has just been rotated.
So now layer is on the y axis and the softmax probability is on the x axis.
The numbers here are still incorrect because I did not change this extent.
Uh, whereas this line over here.
So the numbers are wrong, but the axis labels are right.
And to be honest, I was actually a little bit unsure about whether it's better, whether it would be
more clear to show it with this orientation or this orientation.
I actually initially made both the plots to look like this.
And then I changed my mind and decided to show it like this.
So I don't think there's a real single correct and incorrect way to show these plots.
As long as you are interpreting it correctly and labeling the axes correctly, then it's all fine.
So that's it for this video.
I'm sure you have already started to imagine the other kinds of analyses that you could do to follow
up on these patterns.
One line of subsequent research, for example, would be to find the exact pairs of tokens that get
those extremely high attention scores and then figure out what pairs those are and see if that kind
of high attention pairing is reproducible in larger data sets.
That is certainly not trivial to do, but that would be a natural next step.